Title: Sheffield

----

Section: 4

----

Info:

-
  term: Hotels
  desc: King's Head, Royal.
-
  term: Market Day
  desc: Tuesday and Saturday.
-
  term: Fairs
  desc: Trinity Tuesday, and November 28th.
-
  term: Bankers
  desc: Sheffield Banking Co.; Sheffield and Hallamshire Banking Co.; Sheffield and Rotherham Banking Co.; Sheffield Union Bank.

----

Notes: A telegraph station.

----

Text:

This great seat of the Cutlery trade is beautifully placed on the river Sheaf, where it joins the Don, among some of the most picturesque hills in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the district of Hallam-shire, and 162} miles from London, by the Great Northern Railway. Its suburbs spreading mile after mile in all directions, hill and dale, and every accessible point on the slopes between being occupied by houses and villas, in endless variety, offer to the stranger new objects of pleasure at each turn, and to residents, prospects of great extent and beauty. To one fond of the country, rambling along river, over hills and through forests to obtain some distant point of view, no matter which, Sheffield possesses almost inexhaustible attractions. Two members retuned. Population in 1861, 185,172, of whom about 150, 000 live in the town and its immediate suburbs, which embrace more than seven-eighths of the buildings and population of the townships of Ecclesall, Bierlaw, and Brightside-Bierlaw, and about two-thirds of those of Nether Hallam. Knives, forks, razors, saws, scissors, printing type, optical instruments, Britannia metal, Sheffield plate, scythes, garden implements, files, screws, other tools, stoves, fenders, as well as engines, railway springs, buffers, &c., are among the articles manufactured here-steel being the basis of nearly all; the best of which is made from iron imported from Sweden. Sheffield plate, or silver laid on copper, was discovered here by a Sheffield man, T. Bolsover, and taken up by Mr. Handcock, about 1758. The Britannia metal and German silver are both compositions imitating this plate, the manufacture of which is much promoted by the discovery of electro-plating. Rodgers' cutlery and Wilkinson's plate warehouses are among the largest; while metal foundries, vast grinding and polishing works, are dispersed in the town, and along the Porter and other streams; coal and stone are abundant.

Sheffield has 40 churches and chapels. The Parish Church of *St. Peter* is a large rectangular structure in the perpendicular style of architecture, and has a tower in the centre, surmounted by a lofty crocketed spire. It contains the graves of the Talbots; who formerly held the Manor, and Chantrey's bust of the Rev. J. Wilkinson. This was the first performance of the great sculptor, who was originally & Sheffield milkboy. Another of his bustsis in *St. Paul's Church*. The seat of the Talbots was on a hill to the south-east, now occupied by an old timbered building near the *Cholera Mount*, where many victims of that disease were buried in 1832, now marked by a stone cross. George, the 6th Earl of Shrewsbury (of the Talbot family), had the custody of Mary, Queen of Scots, for 14 years at the *Manor House* here, and elsewhere. Her Secretary, Rolet, and Walker the executor of Charles I., are buried in the Church with Lady Arabella Stuart's mother, &c. At the *Literary Society's Hall*, in Surrey Street, is a large music room, 100 feet long, with a museum, &c., and a portrait of James Montgomery, not a native (he was born at Irvine), but a long time resident at Sheffield, and died at his house on the Mount, in May,  854, and lies buried in the Cemetery.

> Grave, the guardian of his dust;
> Grave, the treasury of the skies!
> Every atom of thy dust,
> Rests in hope again to rise.
>
> Hark! the judgment trumpet calls--
> 'Soul, rebuild thy house of clay:
> Immortality thy walls,
> And Eternity thy day.'

These are some of his own forcible lines. The *Town Hall* was built in 1808; there is also a handsome *Cutler's Hall*, in Church Street, rebuilt in 1832—an important corporation, chartered in 1621. This was many centuries, however, after Sheffield became noted for its staple article; for even Chaucer, who wrote his Canterbury Tales about 1490, speaks of its "thaytles" (whittles) or knives, as being generally known, and his miller is made to carry one in his hose. Here the annual Cutlers' Feast is held. The *Theatre* is a large edifice of brick. An *Assay Office* for marking plate was established in 1773. An *Athenœeum*, opened in 1849. The *General Infirmary* was founded in 1793, on the south side of the town, on an open tract of 31 acres; with the *Queen's Tower* and the Park beyond. A well-endowed *Hospital* was founded in the l7th century, by the Talbot and Howard families (the latter--the Duke of Norfolk's--has the Manor); and there is another amply supported by the cutlers. The *Grammar School* was incorporated by James I. A good stone bridge, besides several others, crosses the river. Dr. Balguy Cawthorne, and Bishop Saunderson were natives.

*Wesley College*, pleasantly situated, near Glossop Road,  is one of the largest and handsomest scholastic institutions in the kingdom. It was finished in 1838, at the cost of more than £10,000, exclusive of more than £4,500 paid for six acres of land, taste. fully laid out in pleasure grounds. It is along and lofty building, with an elegant Corinthian portico in the centre, and has accommodation for 250 boarders.

Evelyn in his "Sylva" speaks of an oak felled in the Park, "so high when lying on the ground, that two men on horse-back could not see each other's heads; and of another which produced 10, 000 feet of timber." There is still much woodland.

(smcp: Excursions from Sheffield).--Only a few of these can be indicated. Up the Sheaf are *Meresbrook House* in Derbyshire, whence a fine view; *Beauchief Abbey* founded by Fitz Ranulph, to atone for his share in Becket's murder, in the twelfth century. Little remains besides part of the church. Near this is *Norton*, the seat of S. Shore. Esq., with the church in which Chantrey is buried (who was born here in 1792), and has an endowed school. Roads hence to Chesterfield and to Chatsworth, 18 miles from Sheffield. The rivers Porter and Rivelin may be followed to Oxten Stones, Lord Seats, and Stanedge Rocks, 1,453 feet high, on the Derbyshire borders, on *Hallam Moor*, in the outer region of the High Peak, a scene of the most rugged wildness. The Oxten Stones are 1357 feet high; and on *Bamford Moor* beyond Stanedge are the Rocking Stone and other Druid remains. Ascending the Don, you come to *Loxley Chase* and *Robin Hood's Well*; here it is stated that famous outlaw was born. To the west of this are Castle and Bailey hills near Bradfield, near the stream of that name, which descends from the plantation by which the moors are enlivened. Further up, the scenery of the Don becomes more bold and striking, especially about Wharncliffe Crags, Walderslow, and the ruins on Bolsterstone Hill, (976 feet high), and *Wortley Hall*, the seat of Lord Wharncliffe. *Atterclite*, 2 miles
below Sheffield, deserves notice, as the place where cast steel was first made. The *Hall*, is the seat of J. Milner, Esq. Archbishop Secker was educated at the dissenting academy here.

----

Uuid: eu7bv3tomjgf7tay
