Title: Tynemouth

----

Section: 4

----

Notes: A telegraph station.

----

Text:

This is to Newcastle-on-Tyne what Brighton is to London, is situated nine miles from that busy and much-improving town. In the time of the ancient Britons the village was denominated Pendal Crag, or the "Head of the Rampart on the Rock," and this pretty clearly indicates its situation. Coal in abundance, some ironstone, and the only limestone strata in the county, are its chief geological features; and though it is little better than a village, the influx of visitors for bathing during the season raise it to almost the dignity of a town. There is one long street, possessing the necessary adjuncts of a "marine hotel," a library, and commodious baths, which were erected in 1807. The parish church was originally in North Shields, but a new one has been lately erected; and a large school, for which a Mr. Kettlewell bequeathed £7,000 in 1825, has been built and endowed in a manner which would have afforded the liberal donor the highest gratification to have beheld. Population, 34,021. In 1758, some barracks were erected in the village, for the accommodation of 1,000 men, but they were sold at the general peace, and now form Percy Square, never, we hope, to be metamorphosed back again. A mineral spring in some local repute at Collercoats Sands--a place of ominous name to solitary bathers who leave their garments on the beach--gives a pretext for a pleasant walk in that direction; and, as Tynemouth is only one mile from North Shields, those who like bustle and activity have not far to go to behold both. But the chief attraction is unquestionably its Priory, which lies to the east of the town, and is of such very remote antiquity that no authentic record exists of its original foundation, but there is some reason to conjecture the seventh century saw its first elevation.

Whether Tynemouth was or was not of Roman origin, it was at a very early date selected as an ecclesiastical site, and for this, by the beauty and peculiarity of its situation, it was well adapted. "The exalted height," says Grose, "on which the monastery stood, rendered it visible at sea a long way off in every direction, where it presented itself as it" reminding and exhorting seamen in danger to make their vows and promise masses and presents to the Virgin Mary and St. Oswin." Thus, though the situation in stormy weather was perhaps not very enviable, the advantages it afforded in those credulous and unsettled times of presenting to the eye of the sailor in distress an object towards which he could direct his prayers and bend his course, were also increased by its being an outpost from which a hostile armament might be descried, and an alarm inland easily communicated. Neither its sanctity or utility were, however, sufficient to preserve it long, for the Danish pirates thrice plundered the priory, and once burned the church. From 625 to 1110, its history seems to be that of alternate destruction and renovation, continually repeated. In 1090, Robert de Mowbray fled hither, and defended. himself within its walls against William Rufus, whom he had conspired to dethrone, but after a time, finding that he could hold out no longer, he sought sanctuary at the altar of the church, from which he was taken by force, carried to Windsor, and, after suffering a long imprisonment, was put to death. During the reign of Elizabeth it was occupied as a fortress, and in the civil wars of the seventeenth century it was frequently besieged.

In 1644 it was taken by the Scots, when thirty-eight pieces of ordnance, and a large store of arms, ammunition, and provisions, fell into their bands.
The garrison were permitted to march out with their baggage, but bound themselves to submit to the instructions of the Parliament. Soon after this, £5,000 mas voted to repair the damages it bad sustained, and Colonel Henry Lilburne was made its deputy governor; but having declared for the King,
Sir Arthur Hazelig immediately marched from Newcastle against him, and stormed the fortress at the very cannon's mouth. During the assault Lilburne was slain.

When the reputation of Tynemouth Priory was at its greatest height, the dead were brought from all parts of the neighbourhood to be interred therein, great sanctity being attributed to the place in consequence of the number of illustrious persons who performed divine service in the oratory of the Virgin.
Among those thus buried were the royal martyr, Oswald, King Eldred, Henry the Hermit of Coquet Island, Malcolm King of Scotland, and other illustrious persons.

After the period when all danger might be sui posed to have passed away, its extensive and exquisitely beautiful ruins were demolished for the sake of their materials. It is probable that much of the priory at Tynemouth was built with the materials of the hewn stone from the Roman station at the Lair, South Shields, and a great part of the town of North Shields, in return, is said to be built from the ruins of the monastery. Dockwraysquare, in particular, is popularly spoken of as having been constructed from this source. Nor did the work of destruction here stop. Being used as a barrack and military store, the work of demolition and alteration has been going on down to a very recent period, until the most conspicuous part of the ruin now standing is that which contains the three very beautiful eastern windows of the chapel. The castle, about a hundred yards west of the monastic ruins, is no merely a plain and picturesque building, fitted up as barracks for the accommodation of a corps of infantry, which, with some artillery, are always stationed there. The broken arches and the picturesque foreground of fishermen's cottages, mouldering ruins, and lichen-festooned turrets, creates a most pictorial contrast to the extensive range of sea and sky beyond.

The lighthouse stands in the Castle yard, and is built of stone in the shape of a tower; the lantern is sixty-tro feet above the ground on which it stands, and one hundred and forty-eight feet above the level of the sea. There are two other lighthouses near the town of North Shields, the one being forty-nine and the other seventy-six feet in height, the lesser one having a compensation in its more exalted position.

----

Uuid: l7keuiuqn4isy4ae
