Title: St. Andrews

----

Section: 3

----

Info:

-
  term: Hotels
  desc: Cross Kcvs, Royal, Star.
-
  term: Market Day
  desc: Monday.
-
  term: Fairs
  desc: Second Monday in April; second Tuesday in August; first Monday after 10th November.

----

Notes:

- Population, 5,176.
- Telegraph station at Cupar, 12½ miles.

----

Text:

This old city is a parliamentary burgh with one member and university, and picturesquely seated on the cliffs, near the "East Neuk" of Fife. The first view of its ruined towers and spires, the sea, and the cultivated environs, is very pleasing. Formerly it was the seat of an Archbishopric, an honour which it claimed from possessing the bones of St. Andrew, the patron saint of Scotland. According to Fordun, St. Rule or Regulus, who discovered these precious relics in 345, set sail from Patræ or Patras, in Greece, with the intention of carrying them to Constantinople, but, having no chart on board, was wrecked, after a long and painful voyage, in *St. Andrews Bay!* A church was dedicated to this able navigator, and a larger one was built over the prize he brought with him. This was the first foundation of the Cathedral, but the present structure dates only from the 12th century at the farthest. As usual it was a cross, 350 feet long, of which only the south walls and gable ends are "left, the whole having been ruined at the Reformation by the adherents of John Knox, after a powerful sermon from him in 1559. Such had been the bitter persecution they sustained from the Romish party, and their infamous leader, Cardinal Beaton or Bethune, that they might be well pardoned for wishing to destroy every vestige of their power here.

Near this relic of antiquity is the very ancient tower of *St.Rule's Church*, 180 feet high.

It is used as a sea mark, and a light is fixed to the cathedral for the same object at night. Close at hand are fragments of an Augustine priory, founded in 1120, and memorable as the place where Robert Bruce held his first parliament in 1309, when working out the independence of his country. The primate's seat or castle is here, overlooking the sea, from a window of which Beaton watched in triumph while his victim Wishart the martyr was dying at the stake; and here also, by a just retribution, this wicked oppressor was murdered by Norman Lesly in 1546. Patrick Hamilton and three others were also burnt by the dominant party. A bishop of Wishart's family founded a dominican or black friary in the 13th century, of which there are still remains.

St Andrews is of so much historical celebrity, and so rich in memorials of the past, that no one can say he has seen Scotland who has not paid it a visit. Dr. Johnson was here in 1773, in his tour with Boswell; in its streets, "there is," says he "the silence and solitude of inactive indigence and gloomy de-population"--a truly Johnsonian burst. Unforunately it stands out of the beaten track. Something, however, has been done to redeem its neglected air, by a townsman, Major Andrews, who, while provost, exerted himself to stop the progress of decay, and introduced modern improvements. There are three principal streets, most of the houses of which are large and antique-looking; at the end or one, on the west side of the town, is an old gate, a remnant of the walls which surrounded it.

In the parish church is a line monument to Archbishop Sharpe, "that arch traitor to the Lord and his church," as the Covenanters styled him, whom John Balfour of Burley, Hackstone of Rathillet, and others, barbarously murdered on Magus Muir. They were watching for another person when they met the unfortunate prelate. This muir is 3 miles from the city, and the exact spot where the bloody deed was perpetrated is marked by a stone in the midst of a fir wood, near the village of Boarhills. Its name properly is Mucross, from the boars which used to haunt it in such numbers that a boar is blazoned in the city arms.

Three colleges compose the *University*, which was founded in 1411, by Bishop Wardlaw. *St. Salvador* (or Saviour's) is an unfinished quadrangle, 230 feet long, begun by Bishop Kennedy, whose effigies are in the chapel. *St. Leonard's* was founded by Prior Hepburn in 1552; there is an old ruined Gothic church attached to it, and a modern one by the side. The third is *St. Mary's*, which has been lately restored. About 150 students frequent this University. The library contains upwards of 50,000 volumes.

Close to the old priory of Blackfriars is another valuable institution, the Grammar School, which has been converted into *The Madras College*, at the instance of Dr. Bell, a native, the author of the Bell (or monitor) system of teaching, which prevailed till lately in most of the national schools. He was chaplain to the East India Company, and left £60,000 to his native city for education. Here about 800 children are taught classics, mathematics, &c.

The harbour is rocky, and of little consequence. Formerly it had a good trade. One branch of manufacture still flourishes here, that of making balls for golf--a favourite game, played on the links or flat sands along the sea shore.

----

Uuid: gYTjp2tIqjQS6T8L
