Title: Loch Lomond

----

Section: 3

----

Info:

-
  term: Hotels
  desc: Inverarnan Inn, at the northern extremity; Tarbet Inn, on the western shore; Rowardennan Inn, on the eastern shore.

----

Text:

(smcp: Loch Lomond) is a large lake lying between Dumbarton and Stirlingshires, and may be said to belong to both, as the boundary line which separates the two counties passes through it. Loch Lomond is justly considered one of the finest lakes in Scotland, and we cannot better describe it than in the words of Dr. Maculloch:—

> Loch Lomond is unquestionably the pride of our lakes; incomparable in its beauty as in its dimensions, exceeding all others in variety, as it does in extent and splendour, and uniting in itself every style of scenery which is found in the other lakes of the Highlands. I must even assign to it the palm above Loch Katrine, the only one which is most distinguished from it in character,--the only one to which it does not contain an exact parallel in the style of its landscapes. As to the superiority of Loch Lomond to all other lakes, there can be no question. Everywhere it is, in some way, picturesque; and everywhere, it offers landscapes, not merely to the cursory spectator, but to the painter. From its richness of scenery it presents more pictures than all the lakes of the Highlands united. It possesses, moreover, a style of landscape to which Scotland produces no resemblance whatever. This is found in the varied and numerous islands that cover its noble expanse; forming the feature, which above all others, distinguishes Loch Lomond, and which, even had it no other attractions, would render it what it is in every respect—the paragon of Scottish lakes.

Boats can be hired at Balloch, for visiting the islands and points of interest on the Loch. A steamer is provided for places more remote. The following are a few places of interest, and should not be left unnoticed:—Lennox Castle, Inch Cailliach, near Bealmaha Pass, Banachra Castle, opposite Glen Truim, where the Macgregors beat the Colquhouns (sounded "Cohoon") of Luss, and Rowardennan, where the ascent to *Ben Lomond* is made -- a mountain, 3,240 feet above the sea. A coach runs from Inversnaid to Loch Katrine during the summer, five miles, passing through Rob Roy's country. *Ben Venue*, 2,800 feet, is on the south side of Loch Katrine, which is surrounded by the scenery of the "Lady of the Lake." Then the wild *Trossachs Pass*, under the Ben Awe, a mile long, to Loch Achray inn; the bridge or "brig" o' Turk, Loch Vennachar, and Callander, at the foot of the Highlands; and down the Teith to Stirling, about 35 miles from Loch Lomond. During the summer, passengers can be booked throughout from Glasgow, *viâ* Loch Lomond, Loch Katrine, and round by Stirling, to Glasgow or Edinburgh.

----

Uuid: nzK6lMkOkXp19x3T
