Title: Grimsby Docks

----

Section: 4

----

Text:

About fifteen years have now elapsed since a far-seeing mercantile company fastened upon this spot which the sagacity of the old roving sea-kings chose to give them the command of the Humber; and there they commenced planting, in defiance of all natural obstacles, a new commercial city, to become the great entrepôt of the trade between western, northern, and eastern Europe.

The company invaded the domain of the rolling waters, and, upon the treacherous mud, they have raised massive superstructures, and thus added nearly 140 acres of solid land to the occupation of man; and by the happy union of science, capital, and labour, have founded the finest harbour on the eastern coast of England. The first stone was laid by Prince Albert in 1849. The New Docks present a striking example of the advantage to be derived from a union of railways, docks, and warehouses, executed under one complete plan, and worked under one management Grimsby, at the mouth of the Humber, five miles from its confluence with the sea, has in front a deep roadstead, with excellent anchorage in blue clay, protected from the ocean by the promontory of Spurn Point. Great Grimsby Roads affords the only refuge be-treen the Thames and the Firth of Forth. The Old Dock was purchased by the Manchester, Sheffield, and Lincolnshire Company, when they decided on their "Water Terminus". It has an entrance-lock of 150 feet in length, and 37 feet in width, with 18 feet on its sill at high tide.

Tho new tidal basin has an area of 15 acres: its depth at low spring tide is nine feet; low neaps, 12½; high springs, 27⅝; high neaps, 24¼; at the landing slip within the tidal basin the largest steamers can lie-to safely, at any time of tide. The dock is entered from its tidal basin by two locks of massive masonry, with double gates for ebb and flood tides. The hydraulic tower is 300 feet high. It has a water area of upwards of 25 acres.

In constructing these works, 135 acres have been reclaimed; wharfs or quays extend 3,600 feet in length--quays traversed by railways from the man lines into sheds and warehouses. Sheds are close to the quays, 750 feet in length, and 50 feet in breadth, affording a covered area of 4,000 feet, and a vaulted warehouse 150 feet square, for free and bonded goods. All the machinery and accessories are on the newest and most perfect principles, and the arrangements for passenger traffic and light or perishable merchandise are on an equally complete scale.

The railway extends to the edge of a low-water landing stage in the outer tidal basin, where a station is built provided with accommodation for passengers, who, within the cover of the station, may be carried by trains in attendance, as goods also may, to any part of England or Scotland.

----

Uuid: y9rfrcnbewhyeneh
